My dear teacher, should we live for
others even if they
treat us badly or don't
care about us? For example, I work part-time
at a coffee shop,
and there are two
very close friends there. I do a lot of work
at the shop, while they just
sit around and do nothing. But they only
think about themselves,
while I think about everyone.
Thank you for your question.
This question includes a specific example.
First, you said that we all
live for
others. For example, a wife lives for her husband, for her children, and for her
parents, right? Then,
the person who lives the
most in a country is the Party
Secretary, right? Does the Party Secretary live for everyone? Does the
President live for everyone? Does the Prime Minister
live for everyone? Does the Provincial Party Secretary live for everyone? So, we should
live for everyone.  It's still better to
live for others, isn't it? No one lives without
others. If we do
n't have the good fortune to live for others,
then we suffer. For example, can a sick person
lying in bed still live for
others? No, right? Can
someone with a mental illness still live for
others? No. Therefore,
only those with good fortune can live for others. And
what we should aim for is
living for others. Do you want to be a
king or an official? You still want to live for
others, don't you? Do you
want to be a billionaire? Do you live for
others? A billionaire must have a corporation,
must care for their workers, right? They must focus on their
business. So,
the direction we should aim for is to
live for others, and we must
cultivate the virtue of living for
others. Cultivate the virtue of living for others,
abandon the virtue of selfishness. Let me
put it this way, in your specific situation:
compared to those two friends who only care about themselves, and
compared to you, you...  Seeing how
well those two friends observe each other's work,
or whether your observation skills are better, you always do
everything for them. If they're just sitting around doing nothing, then
your observation skills will be
sharper and more developed, or
theirs will be sharper. This means
you'll develop and excel
a little more. Isn't that great?
That's what we need to have, that's what young people need:
keen observation and problem-solving skills. And that's
something we can only achieve by living for others.
Right? That's the
first thing you'll gain. The second is that
you'll gain the trust of the shop owner.
Right?
So, what we gain is that we
should do. If something benefits us, we should do it. For
example, if my friends are thieves and
addicts, and I live for others, I'll
give them money. Addiction is
n't about doing something good; it's about doing something that
benefits you, something that does good for
others.
So, what you need to accumulate is this ability.
The ability to respond quickly and
effectively in all aspects of
knowledge and dedication—if you are lazy, can you contribute?
Laziness is fatal, so you
must train your body and mind.
Your youth greatly needs knowledge.
If we are lazy, we become
stagnant, we cannot observe, we are
not quick, we are not
perceptive, and that goes hand in hand with failure, right?
Therefore, living for others is a
very good way of living, and our Buddha
is a symbol of living for
others. Uncle Ho was also a symbol of living
for others, wasn't he? Therefore, he was very
intelligent and bright.
[Music]